---
title: Pre-requisite Review
exports:
    - format: pdf
      template: plain_latex
      output: exports/prereq-hw.pdf
      id: exports-prereq-hw-pdf
      
downloads:
  - id: exports-prereq-hw-pdf
    title: Pre-requisite Review
---

* Total marks: 155

* Homework deadline on Gradescope (Login to Brightspace, click Assessments ->
  Gradescope).

* Submission method: There are separate assignments in gradescope: Prereq autograded
  and Prereq Manually Graded. Problems 1-3 are Autograded, rest are manually
  graded. For autograding you will have to submit the three files:

:::{image} autograder/submission-screenshot.png
:alt: all three files inside the upload dropbox
:width: 500px
:align: right
:::

* Resources for review:
    * Recursion (Section 4.10) of [Kernighan and Ritchie](https://archive.org/details/the-ansi-c-programming-language-by-brian-w.-kernighan-dennis-m.-ritchie.org/page/n1/mode/2up)
    * A [30-page review](http://cs229.stanford.edu/summer2020/cs229-linalg.pdf) of Linear Algebra by Zico Kolter
    * Review vectors [here](https://www.khanacademy.org/science/mechanics-essentials/xafb2c8d81b6e70e3:a-bullet-shot-from-a-gun-and-a-bullet-dropped-reach-the-ground-at-the-same-time-here-s-why)
    * Probability: [Khan Academy](https://www.khanacademy.org/math/statistics-probability)
    * Multi-variable calculus: [Khan academy](https://www.khanacademy.org/math/multivariable-calculus)
    * Linear algebra: [Gilbert Strang lectures](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL49CF3715CB9EF31D)

# Problem 1: Factorial
(20 marks)

The factorial of a non-negative integer n , denoted by $n!$, is the product of all positive integers less than or equal to n . The factorial of n also equals the product of n with the next smaller factorial:

$n ! = n × ( n − 1 ) × ( n − 2 ) × ( n − 3 ) × ⋯ × 3 × 2 × 1 = n × ( n − 1 ) !$

For example,
$5 ! = 5 × 4 ! = 5 × 4 × 3 × 2 × 1 = 120.$
The value of 0! is 1, according to the convention for an empty product.

Write a recursive C function to compute factorial of a natural number n. It should pass the test_factorial function 10 times. test_factorial function is given.

C programmers: download and edit the file [test_factorial_template.c](autograder/submission/test_factorial_template.c) .

Rename the file to `test_factorial.c`. Complete the function and submit the file as a separate file to Gradescope autograder. 


# Problem 2: Prime numbers
(20 marks)

A natural number (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc.) is called a prime number (or a prime) if it is greater than 1 and cannot be written as the product of two smaller natural numbers.

Write a C function to calculate if a number is prime. Return 1 if it is prime and 0 if it is not a prime. If the number is not a prime number, then a factor exists. Return the factor as through a pointer.

C programmers: Download and edit the file [test_prime_template.c](autograder/submission/test_prime_template.c). Complete the function and submit the file as a separate file to brightspace.

Rename the file to `test_prime_template.c`. Complete the function and submit the file as a separate file to Gradescope autograder. 

# Problem 3: Structures
(20 marks)

2.a. Write a C data structure named `struct date` that capture year, month and days of a date.

2.b. Also write a function `greg_is_leap_year` that determines whether an year is a leap year.

2.c. Also write a function `date_greg_days` that count the total number of days since 0001-01-01 AD.

C programmers: Download and edit the file [test_date_template.c](autograder/submission/test_date_template.c). Complete the funciton and submit the file as a separate file to brightspace.

Rename the file to `test_date_template.c`. Complete the function and submit the file as a separate file to Gradescope autograder. 


# Problem 4: Probability and statistics
(25 marks)

Resources: [Khan Academy](https://www.khanacademy.org/math/statistics-probability)

1. Write the definitions of a Random Variable, Expectation, and Variance. (5
   marks)
2. What is the difference between Expectation and a sample mean? When do they converge? (5 marks)
<!-- 3. Write the three axioms (properties) of a Probability distribution (measure). (5 marks) -->
3. What is the difference between Probability density function,
   a Probability mass function and  Cumulative distribution function. (5
   marks)
4. Prove that for any Random Variable $X$, the variance $V(X) = E[X^2] - E[X]^2$, where $E[X]$ denotes the expectation of $X$. (5 marks)
5. Prove that $E[X^2] > 0$ (5 marks)

<!--
7. Prove that the expectation is a linear. $ E[\alpha X + \beta Y] = \alpha
   E[X] + \beta E[Y] $ for any real scalars $\alpha, \beta \in \mathbb{R}$ and random variables $X$ and $Y$ under conditions of finiteness (all integrals are finite). 
8. Define independent random variables.

# Problem 5

1. What is an unbiased estimator?
2. What the bias and variance of an estimator?
3. Let $X_1, X_2, \dots, X_n$ be a random sample of size n.
    1. Show that $X^2$ is a biased estimator for $\mu^2$.
    2. Find the amount of bias in this estimator.
    3. What happens to the bias as the sample size $n$ increases?
4. Aircrew escape systems are powered by a solid propellant. The burning rate of this propellant is an important product characteristic. Specifications require that the mean burning rate must be 50 cm/s. We know that the standard deviation of burning rate is $ \sigma = 2 cm/s$. The experimenter decides to specify a type I error probability or significance level of $\alpha = 0.05$. He selects a random sample of $n = 25$ and obtains a sample average burning rate of $x = 51.3 cm/s$. What conclusions should he draw?

# Problem 6

Consider the data in [table-6-14.csv]({{ pageassetpath }}/table-6-14.csv), use C-programming to assist you in multiple linear regression, and answer the following questions. Use [regresssion.c]({{ pageassetpath }}/regression.c). It provides functions for reading csv file and plotting. They account 50 points of this assignment.
    1. Which of these six regressors will be kept in your final regression equation? Why? P-value = 0.10
    2. Find the regression coefficients for each regressor in your final equation.
    3. Give the overall multiple R for your final equation.
    4. Give the adjusted R square
    5. Out print your residual plots for your final regression equation and comment about your plots.
    
-->

# Problem 5: Multivariable Calculus
(20 marks)

Resources: [Khan academy](https://www.khanacademy.org/math/multivariable-calculus)

1. Find the mininimum point the function $f(x) = x^2 - 6x + 33$ using
   calculus. Write the property of derivatives that made you reach the answer?
   (10 marks)

2. Find the mininimum point the function $f(x, y) = x^2 - 6x + y^2 - 8x - xy +
   33$ using calculus. Write the property of derivatives that made you reach
   the answer? (10 marks)


# Problem 6: Linear Algebra
(50 marks)

Please review Linear Algebra concepts and notations from [here](http://cs229.stanford.edu/summer2020/cs229-linalg.pdf) and answer the following questions (all answers are in the pdf).

Other resources: [Gilbert Strang lectures](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL49CF3715CB9EF31D)

1. (2 marks) In matrix notation defined in the linked document, when I say a matrix is $n \times m$ (alternatively the matrix is in the set $\mathbb{R}^{n \times m}$, does the n refer to the number of rows or the number of columns .

2. (5 marks) Let the matrix $A \in \mathbb{R}^{4 \times 2}$ and $B \in \mathbb{R}^{2
   \times 3}$ be defined as

    $$
     A := \begin{bmatrix} 1 &  2 \\
                         3 &  5 \\
                          7 & 11 \\
                          13 & 17 \\
          \end{bmatrix}, \\
     B := \begin{bmatrix} 19 & 23 & 29 \\
                         31 & 37 & 41 \\
          \end{bmatrix} \\
    $$

    Is the matrix multiplication $AB$ valid? Make up an example of matrix $B$
    when matrix multiplication $AB$ would not have been valid. Find out the
    matrix multiplication $C = AB$ by hand. Write down all the steps to show
    which numbers get multiplied by which numbers.

3. Given two matrices $A$ of size $m \times n$ and $B$ of size $p \times q$,
   when is the matrix multiplication $AB$ valid? When is the matrix
   multiplication $BA$ valid? When is the addition $A + B$ valid? (5 marks)

4. What is the transpose of a matrix? If a matrix $A$ has the shape
   $n \times m$, what is the shape of matrix $A^\top$ (3 marks).

4. Define dot product for two vectors? How to test when two given vectors are
   perpendicular? Assume you have two n-dimensional vectors $\vec{a} = [a_1, a_2, \dots, a_n]$ and $\vec{b} = [b_1, b_2, \dots, b_n]$. Denote dot product as, $\vec{a} \cdot \vec{b}$? (5 marks)

5. Denote the above vectors as column matrices. Define the following $n \times
   1$ matrices with the vector components.

   $$\mathbf{a} = \begin{bmatrix} a_1 \\ a_2 \\ \vdots \\ a_n \end{bmatrix},\\
   \mathbf{b} = \begin{bmatrix} b_1 \\ b_2 \\ \vdots \\ b_n \end{bmatrix}$$

   Use matrix operation like matrix transpose and matrix multiplication to
   write vector dot product (5 marks).

8. Define cross product for two vectors? How to test when two vectors are
   parallel to other? (5 marks)

9. How to can you find the magnitude of a vector? What is a unit vector? (5
   marks)

10. What is a square matrix (0 marks)?

11. What are the column vectors and row vectors of a matrix? How can you write
    matrix multiplication in terms of row vectors and column vectors of a
    matrix (5 marks)?

12. Suppose you are given a $n \times n$ square matrix called $U$. All it's
    $n$ columns vectors are unit vectors and every pair of the unit vectors
    are perpendicular to each other. Find out the product $U^\top U$ . What is the name of given to such matrices whose column vectors
    are unit vectors and are perpendicular to each other? (10
    marks).

:::{tip} Hint
:class: dropdown

Assume the column vectors of the matrix $U$ be $\mathbf{\hat{u}}_1, \dots,
\mathbf{\hat{u}}_n$. Then the $U$ matrix can be written as,

$$ U = \begin{bmatrix}
| & | & & | \\
\mathbf{\hat{u}}_1 & \mathbf{\hat{u}}_2 & \dots & \mathbf{\hat{u}}_n \\
| & | & & | \\
\end{bmatrix}
$$

The transpose of matrix $U$ is

$$ U^\top = \begin{bmatrix}
\rule{2em}{0.4pt} \mathbf{\hat{u}}_1^\top \rule{2em}{0.4pt} \\ \rule{2em}{0.4pt} \mathbf{\hat{u}}_2^\top \rule{2em}{0.4pt} \\ \vdots \\
\rule{2em}{0.4pt} \mathbf{\hat{u}}_n^\top \rule{2em}{0.4pt} \\
\end{bmatrix}
$$

Block multiply them together to find the answer. Also, see the [Block matrix
Multiplication](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Block_matrix#Multiplication)

:::
